Welcome to Anaesthesia Compendium. Today's viva station: the local anaesthetics.
I shall take the candidate through it, question by question. Let us begin.
We turn to the local anaesthetics. Begin with their classification and structure.
The local anaesthetics are drugs that reversibly block nerve conduction when
applied locally. Structurally each molecule has three parts: an aromatic,
lipophilic group; an intermediate chain; and a hydrophilic amine group.
The nature of the bond in the intermediate chain divides the class into two:
the esters, such as cocaine, procaine, tetracaine and chloroprocaine,
in which the link is an ester bond; and the amides, such as lidocaine, bupivacaine,
levobupivacaine, ropivacaine and prilocaine, in which it is an amide bond.
This ester-or-amide distinction is clinically important because it determines how
the drugs are metabolised and their propensity for allergy:
esters are hydrolysed by plasma cholinesterase and may cause allergy through a
para-aminobenzoic-acid metabolite, whereas amides are metabolised in the liver and
rarely cause true allergy.
A useful aide-memoire is that the amides contain two letter i's in their name.
Describe the mechanism of action.
Local anaesthetics block the voltage-gated sodium channels of the nerve membrane,
preventing the sodium influx that generates the action potential,
and so reversibly blocking conduction.
They reach their binding site on the inner aspect of the channel: the un-ionised,
lipid-soluble form of the drug crosses the lipid membrane,
and within the axoplasm the ionised form binds to the channel.
The block is use-dependent, or phasic:
the drug binds more readily to channels that are open or inactivated,
so that more rapidly firing fibres are blocked preferentially,
and the drug preferentially stabilises the inactivated state.
By holding the sodium channels closed,
the drug raises the threshold for excitation, slows conduction,
and ultimately abolishes propagation of the impulse.
So the essential action is a use-dependent block of axonal sodium channels from
within.
Relate the physicochemical properties to onset, potency and duration.
Three properties govern the clinical behaviour.
The dissociation constant, the pKa, determines the speed of onset:
since only the un-ionised fraction crosses the membrane,
an agent whose pKa is close to physiological pH has a larger un-ionised fraction
and a faster onset, whereas a high pKa means more of the drug is ionised and onset
is slower.
Lipid solubility determines potency:
more lipophilic agents penetrate the nerve more readily and are more potent.
Protein binding determines duration:
agents that bind the sodium-channel protein more avidly have a longer duration of
action.
So, for example, bupivacaine is highly lipid-soluble and protein-bound,
making it potent and long-acting but with a relatively slow onset,
while lidocaine is intermediate. These structure-activity relationships allow the
properties of each agent to be understood and predicted.
How are the local anaesthetics metabolised?
Metabolism follows the ester-or-amide division.
The esters are rapidly hydrolysed in the plasma by plasma cholinesterase,
also called pseudocholinesterase, giving them generally short half-lives;
a metabolite of the ester agents is para-aminobenzoic acid,
which is responsible for the allergic reactions that occur more commonly with
esters.
The amides are metabolised more slowly in the liver by the cytochrome enzymes,
so their clearance depends on hepatic function and hepatic blood flow,
and they accumulate in hepatic impairment and low-output states.
Prilocaine is partly metabolised to a compound that can cause methaemoglobinaemia.
So the esters are cleared quickly in the plasma but carry an allergy risk,
while the amides depend on the liver and are rarely allergenic,
which influences both safety and the choice of agent.
Why is local anaesthesia less effective in infected, inflamed tissue?
Because infected and inflamed tissue is acidic.
Local anaesthetics are weak bases, and in the more acidic environment of infected
tissue a greater proportion of the drug is in the ionised form,
which cannot cross the lipid nerve membrane to reach its intracellular site of
action, so less of the un-ionised, membrane-permeant form is available and the
block is poorer.
There may also be increased vascularity carrying the drug away and altered nerve
excitability.
The practical consequences are that infiltration into infected tissue,
such as an abscess, often gives inadequate anaesthesia,
and that a regional block placed proximal to the inflamed area, in normal tissue,
is preferred.
So tissue acidosis, by shifting the ionisation equilibrium away from the active
un-ionised form, undermines local anaesthesia in infection.
Explain differential nerve block.
Differential block is the observation that different nerve-fibre types are blocked
at different concentrations and rates,
so that the modalities they carry are lost in sequence.
In general the smaller, and the myelinated, fibres are blocked more readily:
autonomic and pain and temperature fibres tend to be blocked before touch and
pressure, which are blocked before the large motor and proprioceptive fibres.
This is why a neuraxial or regional block may produce sympathetic and sensory block
with relative sparing of motor function, particularly with dilute solutions,
and why the level of sympathetic block can exceed that of sensory and motor block.
The basis lies in fibre diameter, myelination and firing frequency interacting with
the use-dependent action of the drug. So differential block allows, for instance,
analgesia with preserved movement, which is exploited in labour and postoperative
epidural analgesia.
Take me through the individual agents, beginning with lidocaine.
Lidocaine, or lignocaine, is the prototypical amide, of intermediate potency,
rapid onset and intermediate duration, and is the most versatile agent:
used for infiltration, peripheral and regional blocks, topically,
and intravenously both as an antiarrhythmic and increasingly as a systemic
analgesic and to obtund the airway response.
Its rapid onset reflects a pKa close to physiological pH.
Bupivacaine is highly lipophilic and protein-bound,
making it potent and long-acting with a slower onset,
widely used for prolonged regional and neuraxial anaesthesia,
but notable for cardiotoxicity in overdose.
Prilocaine is an amide of low toxicity,
useful for intravenous regional anaesthesia,
with the caveat of methaemoglobinaemia at high doses.
So lidocaine is the versatile intermediate agent,
bupivacaine the potent long-acting one,
and prilocaine the low-toxicity agent for specific uses.
Why were levobupivacaine and ropivacaine developed?
They were developed to retain bupivacaine's potency and long duration while
reducing its cardiotoxicity.
Bupivacaine is a racemic mixture, and its cardiotoxicity — a propensity to cause
refractory ventricular arrhythmias and cardiac arrest in overdose — resides
predominantly in the R-enantiomer, which binds avidly to cardiac sodium channels.
Levobupivacaine is the pure S-enantiomer of bupivacaine,
with similar anaesthetic properties but less cardiotoxicity.
Ropivacaine is a related pure S-enantiomer agent that is somewhat less potent but
also less cardiotoxic and produces relatively more sensory than motor block,
useful where motor sparing is wanted.
Both are now often preferred to racemic bupivacaine for major regional and
neuraxial blocks on grounds of their improved safety margin.
So they are examples of the chiral-switch strategy applied to reduce a specific,
dangerous toxicity.
What are the maximum safe doses, and why do they matter?
Maximum recommended doses exist because systemic absorption of an excessive dose
causes local anaesthetic systemic toxicity.
The figures, expressed per kilogram, are approximately:
lidocaine three milligrams per kilogram plain,
rising to about seven with adrenaline;
bupivacaine and levobupivacaine around two milligrams per kilogram;
prilocaine around six, higher than the others because of its low toxicity;
ropivacaine around three.
The addition of adrenaline, by causing vasoconstriction,
slows absorption and increases the safe dose for the agents whose uptake it limits.
These are guides, not precise thresholds,
and the safe dose is lower where absorption is rapid, as from vascular sites,
and in the small, elderly or unwell patient.
The essential point is to calculate the dose for every patient,
in milligrams per kilogram, before injecting, to avoid inadvertent overdose.
Describe local anaesthetic systemic toxicity — its features and progression.
Local anaesthetic systemic toxicity results from a high plasma concentration,
from inadvertent intravascular injection or absorption of an excessive dose.
The features are classically biphasic.
Early central nervous system features predominate: circumoral tingling,
a metallic taste, tinnitus, light-headedness and agitation,
progressing to muscle twitching and then generalised seizures,
and ultimately central nervous system depression with coma and respiratory arrest.
As the concentration rises further, cardiovascular toxicity supervenes:
initially hypertension and tachycardia, then myocardial depression, hypotension,
conduction block, arrhythmias and, in severe cases,
refractory ventricular arrhythmias and cardiac arrest.
Bupivacaine is particularly cardiotoxic,
with cardiovascular collapse that can occur with little warning and is hard to
resuscitate.
So toxicity progresses from central excitation through central depression to
cardiovascular collapse, and recognition of the early features is vital.
How is local anaesthetic systemic toxicity managed?
Management is by an established protocol. The injection is stopped and help
summoned. The airway is secured and the patient ventilated with one hundred per
cent oxygen, since hypoxia and acidosis worsen toxicity.
Seizures are controlled, preferably with a benzodiazepine,
avoiding large doses of cardiodepressant drugs.
The circulation is supported, and if cardiac arrest occurs,
cardiopulmonary resuscitation is begun and may need to be prolonged.
The specific treatment is intravenous lipid emulsion — a bolus followed by an
infusion — which is thought to act as a lipid sink that sequesters the lipophilic
local anaesthetic away from the cardiac sodium channels and to provide metabolic
support to the myocardium.
Standard resuscitation drugs are modified,
with smaller adrenaline doses and avoidance of certain antiarrhythmics.
So oxygenation, seizure and circulatory support,
and lipid emulsion are the cornerstones.
Tell me about methaemoglobinaemia and the agents that cause it.
Methaemoglobinaemia is the oxidation of the iron in haemoglobin from the ferrous to
the ferric state, producing methaemoglobin,
which cannot carry oxygen and shifts the dissociation curve,
causing a functional anaemia and cyanosis unresponsive to oxygen,
with a characteristic low and fixed oxygen saturation on the pulse oximeter.
Among the local anaesthetics it is caused by prilocaine, through its metabolite,
particularly at high doses, and by topical benzocaine.
It is more significant in neonates and in those with impaired reducing systems.
It is treated, when significant, with intravenous methylthioninium chloride,
methylene blue, which reduces the methaemoglobin back to haemoglobin.
So methaemoglobinaemia is a specific toxicity to remember with prilocaine and
benzocaine, recognised by cyanosis with a low fixed saturation,
and reversed by methylene blue.
What is the position on allergy to local anaesthetics?
True allergy to local anaesthetics is uncommon and is far more often attributed to
them than actually present, since many reactions are due to intravascular
adrenaline, vasovagal episodes or anxiety rather than to allergy.
When genuine allergy occurs, it is much more common with the ester agents,
because their metabolism produces para-aminobenzoic acid, a recognised allergen,
and there can be cross-reactivity among esters and with related compounds and
preservatives such as methylparaben.
True allergy to the amides is rare. So in a patient reporting local-anaesthetic
allergy, the history is examined carefully to distinguish true allergy from other
reactions, an amide is generally safe if an ester was implicated,
and formal allergy testing may be arranged.
The practical message is that amide allergy is rare and most reported reactions are
not true allergy.
What adjuncts are added to local anaesthetics, and why?
Several adjuncts modify the block.
Adrenaline causes vasoconstriction, which slows systemic absorption,
prolonging the block, reducing peak plasma concentration and so toxicity,
and providing a marker of intravascular injection;
it is avoided in end-arterial territories such as digits, traditionally,
and where vasoconstriction is undesirable.
Sodium bicarbonate raises the pH of the solution,
increasing the un-ionised fraction and so speeding onset.
Opioids added to neuraxial local anaesthetic act on spinal opioid receptors to
enhance and prolong analgesia.
Alpha-two agonists such as clonidine and dexmedetomidine, and dexamethasone,
prolong the duration of peripheral and neuraxial blocks.
So adjuncts are used to speed onset, prolong duration,
improve analgesic quality and increase safety,
and the choice depends on the block and the clinical aim.
Tell me about cocaine, for completeness,
and about topical preparations such as EMLA.
Cocaine is the original local anaesthetic, an ester,
unique in also blocking the reuptake of noradrenaline,
which gives it vasoconstrictor and sympathomimetic properties;
this makes it useful as a topical agent for nasal and airway surgery,
where it both anaesthetises and shrinks the mucosa,
but also gives it cardiovascular toxicity — hypertension, tachycardia,
arrhythmias and coronary vasoconstriction — and a high abuse potential,
so its use is restricted and controlled.
EMLA is a eutectic mixture of local anaesthetics, lidocaine and prilocaine,
formulated so that the mixture is liquid at room temperature and can penetrate
intact skin, used to provide topical anaesthesia before cannulation and minor
procedures, particularly in children,
applied under occlusion for a period beforehand.
So cocaine is the vasoconstricting topical agent of restricted use,
and EMLA the everyday topical preparation for anaesthetising skin.
Pull it together: how do you use local anaesthetics safely?
I would choose the agent for the block: lidocaine for rapid onset and infiltration,
a long-acting agent such as levobupivacaine or ropivacaine for prolonged regional
or neuraxial anaesthesia, preferring these enantiomer agents over racemic
bupivacaine for their better cardiac safety,
and prilocaine for intravenous regional anaesthesia.
I would calculate the maximum safe dose in milligrams per kilogram for every
patient before injecting, reducing it for rapid-absorption sites and the
compromised patient, and consider adrenaline to slow absorption and prolong the
block.
I would inject with aspiration and incremental dosing to detect intravascular
placement, often with ultrasound guidance.
I would know and be prepared for local anaesthetic systemic toxicity — recognising
the early central features, and having oxygen,
the means to control seizures and support the circulation,
and lipid emulsion immediately available.
So safe practice combines appropriate agent and dose, careful technique,
and readiness to treat toxicity.
Describe the states of the sodium channel and how local anaesthetics interact with
them.
The voltage-gated sodium channel cycles through three states: a resting,
closed state at the negative resting membrane potential; an open,
activated state on depolarisation, through which sodium flows to generate the
action potential; and an inactivated, closed state shortly after,
from which the channel must return to the resting state before it can open again.
Local anaesthetics bind preferentially to the open and inactivated states,
so they bind more during activity, which is the basis of the use-dependent or
phasic block: the more frequently the nerve fires,
the more channels are exposed in the bindable states and the greater the block.
By binding and stabilising the inactivated state,
the drug prevents the channel returning to a state from which it can open,
so conduction fails. This state-dependence explains why rapidly firing fibres are
blocked preferentially.
How does pregnancy affect the response to local anaesthetics,
and what is ion trapping?
Pregnancy increases sensitivity to local anaesthetics,
so that less drug is needed for a given block,
owing to hormonal effects on the nerves and to engorged epidural veins reducing the
volume of the epidural and subarachnoid spaces,
which is why neuraxial doses are reduced in the parturient.
Ion trapping is a separate, important phenomenon at the placenta.
Local anaesthetics cross the placenta in their un-ionised form;
in a fetus that is acidotic, the lower fetal pH causes more of the drug to become
ionised, and the ionised form cannot cross back across the placenta,
so it accumulates — is trapped — in the fetal circulation,
potentially reaching toxic concentrations.
This is most relevant to agents that cross readily and in the distressed,
acidotic fetus. So pregnancy lowers the dose requirement,
and fetal acidosis can trap local anaesthetic in the fetus,
both shaping obstetric practice.
What is tachyphylaxis to local anaesthetics?
Tachyphylaxis is a reduction in the effect of repeated doses of a local anaesthetic
given over time, so that successive doses produce progressively less or shorter
block, requiring larger or more frequent dosing to maintain the effect.
It is seen, for instance, with repeated injections through an epidural catheter
over a prolonged period.
The mechanisms proposed include local changes in pH around the nerve from repeated
injections, a degree of receptor or local tissue adaptation,
and oedema and other local changes. It is distinct from a true pharmacological
tolerance.
The practical relevance is that, over a long block,
the local anaesthetic requirement may rise,
which must be distinguished from catheter displacement and managed within safe dose
limits, and which is one reason continuous infusion regimens are used in preference
to repeated boluses.
So tachyphylaxis is a diminishing response to repeated local anaesthetic dosing.
Discuss the use of local anaesthetics in spinal and epidural anaesthesia,
including baricity.
In spinal anaesthesia a small dose of local anaesthetic is injected into the
cerebrospinal fluid of the subarachnoid space, producing rapid, dense,
extensive block from a tiny dose.
Its spread is influenced by baricity — the density of the solution relative to
cerebrospinal fluid: a hyperbaric solution, made denser by added glucose,
sinks under gravity and its spread is controlled by patient positioning,
which is widely exploited; an isobaric solution spreads less predictably with
position.
In epidural anaesthesia a larger volume of local anaesthetic is placed in the
epidural space, acting on the nerve roots,
with a slower onset and the ability to titrate the level and to provide continuous
analgesia through a catheter.
Dilute solutions give differential block with sensory analgesia and motor sparing,
used in labour and postoperative analgesia.
So baricity and positioning govern spinal spread,
while the epidural route offers titratable, catheter-based block.
Describe intravenous regional anaesthesia and the agent used.
Intravenous regional anaesthesia, or Bier's block, provides anaesthesia of a limb,
usually the arm, for short procedures.
The limb is exsanguinated and a tourniquet inflated to isolate it from the
circulation, and a local anaesthetic is then injected intravenously into the limb,
diffusing from the veins to anaesthetise the nerves.
Prilocaine is the agent of choice because of its low systemic toxicity,
which matters because the safety of the technique depends on the local anaesthetic
remaining confined to the limb.
The critical hazard is premature deflation or failure of the tourniquet,
releasing a bolus of local anaesthetic into the systemic circulation and causing
toxicity, so the tourniquet must remain inflated for a minimum time and the
technique used with full monitoring and resuscitation facilities.
Bupivacaine is avoided because of its cardiotoxicity.
So Bier's block uses prilocaine with strict tourniquet discipline.
What do you know of liposomal and longer-acting local anaesthetic formulations?
Liposomal bupivacaine is a formulation in which bupivacaine is encapsulated in
multivesicular liposomes that release the drug slowly over an extended period,
with the aim of providing prolonged analgesia from a single infiltration or block,
extending the duration of postoperative analgesia beyond that of standard
bupivacaine.
It has been used for wound infiltration and certain blocks as part of
opioid-sparing analgesia. The evidence for a clinically meaningful advantage over
standard local anaesthetic with adjuncts is debated, and it is costly,
so its place is not fully settled.
It illustrates the wider effort to prolong local anaesthetic action — alongside the
use of adjuncts such as dexamethasone and alpha-two agonists and of continuous
catheter techniques — to extend analgesia and reduce opioid use.
So liposomal bupivacaine is a sustained-release approach to prolonging local
anaesthetic analgesia, of contested cost-effectiveness.
Tell me about chloroprocaine and tetracaine.
Chloroprocaine is an ester local anaesthetic with a very rapid onset and a short
duration, owing to its rapid hydrolysis by plasma cholinesterase,
and a low systemic toxicity.
These properties make it useful for short procedures and have led to renewed
interest in it for short-duration spinal anaesthesia,
for instance in ambulatory surgery,
where a rapid onset and quick recovery are wanted,
and it has a history of use in obstetric epidural anaesthesia for its rapid action
and rapid clearance limiting fetal exposure.
Tetracaine, also called amethocaine, is a potent,
long-acting ester used chiefly topically — on the eye,
and as a topical preparation to anaesthetise skin before cannulation,
particularly in children, where it has a faster onset than some alternatives.
So chloroprocaine is the rapid, short, low-toxicity ester for short procedures,
and tetracaine the potent ester used mainly topically.
What factors govern the onset and quality of a nerve block?
Several factors determine onset and quality.
The agent's pKa governs the un-ionised fraction and so the speed of onset,
an agent closer to physiological pH acting faster;
adding bicarbonate raises the pH and hastens onset.
The concentration and dose of the drug,
and the proximity and accuracy of injection to the nerve,
govern the speed and density of block, which is why ultrasound guidance,
by allowing accurate deposition around the nerve, improves both.
Lipid solubility and protein binding govern potency and duration.
The vascularity of the site affects absorption and duration,
and adrenaline prolongs the block by vasoconstriction.
Tissue pH, as in infection, reduces effectiveness.
Fibre type and size determine differential block.
So onset and quality depend on the agent's physicochemistry,
the dose and accuracy of placement, the addition of adjuncts,
and the local tissue conditions.
How does ultrasound guidance improve the safety and quality of regional anaesthesia?
Ultrasound guidance has transformed regional anaesthesia by allowing direct
visualisation of the target nerve, the surrounding structures,
the needle and the spread of the injected local anaesthetic.
This improves the quality of block by enabling accurate deposition of the drug
around the nerve, often allowing a smaller volume and a faster, more reliable onset.
It improves safety by allowing the needle to be kept away from vessels,
the pleura and other structures, reducing the risk of inadvertent intravascular
injection — and so of systemic toxicity — and of nerve injury and pneumothorax,
and by confirming correct spread rather than relying on landmarks alone.
It does not abolish the risk of toxicity, so aspiration,
incremental injection and dose limits remain essential.
So ultrasound improves both the success and the safety of blocks,
and is now standard for many regional techniques.
What is the role of systemic lidocaine infusion?
Intravenous lidocaine infusion is used as a systemic analgesic and
anti-inflammatory adjunct, particularly in major abdominal surgery within
enhanced-recovery pathways.
Given as a low-dose infusion, it provides opioid-sparing analgesia,
attenuates the inflammatory response,
hastens the return of gut function and reduces postoperative ileus,
and may shorten hospital stay.
Its mechanism includes systemic sodium-channel and anti-inflammatory effects rather
than a regional block.
The important caveat is that it is a systemic local anaesthetic,
so the dose must be controlled and the patient monitored for the features of local
anaesthetic systemic toxicity, and it must be accounted for in the total local
anaesthetic load if regional techniques are also used.
So systemic lidocaine is a useful non-opioid analgesic adjunct for major surgery,
used with attention to dose and toxicity,
illustrating a systemic rather than a regional use of a local anaesthetic.
How would you investigate and manage a patient reporting local anaesthetic allergy?
I would first take a careful history to determine what actually happened,
because most reported reactions are not true allergy but are due to intravascular
adrenaline causing palpitations, vasovagal episodes, anxiety, or toxicity,
rather than an immune reaction; true allergy is rare, especially to the amides.
I would establish which agent was implicated, whether it was an ester or an amide,
and the nature and timing of the reaction.
If genuine allergy seems possible, I would arrange referral for formal allergy
investigation, including skin testing and, where appropriate, challenge testing,
to identify a safe agent.
In the meantime, since true amide allergy is rare and ester and amide do not
cross-react, an amide is generally safe if an ester was implicated,
and preservative-free preparations are used to avoid the methylparaben that can
itself cause reactions.
So the approach is careful history,
distinguishing true allergy from other reactions,
and formal testing to find a safe agent.
Give a final integrated account of safe local anaesthetic practice.
Safe practice begins with understanding the pharmacology:
a use-dependent sodium-channel block whose onset,
potency and duration follow the agent's pKa, lipid solubility and protein binding,
and whose esters and amides differ in metabolism and allergy.
I would choose the agent for the task, preferring the safer enantiomer agents,
levobupivacaine and ropivacaine, over racemic bupivacaine for major blocks,
and prilocaine for intravenous regional anaesthesia.
I would calculate the maximum safe dose in milligrams per kilogram for every
patient, reduce it for rapid-absorption sites and the compromised,
the parturient and the acidotic fetus, and consider adrenaline to slow absorption.
I would inject accurately, ideally under ultrasound,
with aspiration and incremental dosing.
Above all I would be prepared for local anaesthetic systemic toxicity — recognising
the early central features and having oxygen,
seizure and circulatory support and lipid emulsion immediately available — since
prevention and prompt treatment of toxicity are the core of safe regional practice.
Describe the clinical order of differential block and its uses.
Clinically the modalities are lost, and recover,
in a characteristic order reflecting fibre susceptibility.
Sympathetic, autonomic fibres are blocked first and most extensively,
so that the level of sympathetic block in a neuraxial technique typically exceeds
the sensory level by a couple of segments,
which is why hypotension from vasodilatation is prominent.
Then pain and temperature are lost, then touch and pressure, and finally,
and least readily, the large motor and proprioceptive fibres.
This ordering allows useful clinical effects:
with dilute local anaesthetic solutions one can produce sensory analgesia with
relative preservation of motor power — a differential block exploited in labour
epidural analgesia, allowing the mother to move,
and in postoperative epidural analgesia.
Recovery occurs in the reverse order. So differential block underlies both the
haemodynamic effects of neuraxial anaesthesia and the ability to provide analgesia
with motor sparing.
What do you know of local anaesthetic neurotoxicity?
Local anaesthetics are, in high concentration and with prolonged contact,
directly neurotoxic. Two clinical entities are recognised.
Transient neurological symptoms — pain or dysaesthesia in the buttocks and legs
after spinal anaesthesia, resolving over days — were associated particularly with
hyperbaric lidocaine spinal anaesthesia,
which contributed to the decline of lidocaine for spinal use.
Cauda equina syndrome, a serious persistent injury,
was associated with continuous spinal anaesthesia using microcatheters delivering
concentrated local anaesthetic to a restricted area,
and with inadvertent high concentrations.
Older preparations of chloroprocaine with particular preservatives were also
implicated in neurotoxicity, since addressed by reformulation.
So local anaesthetics are not entirely benign to nerves: appropriate agents,
concentrations and techniques are used to avoid neurotoxicity,
and lidocaine is now generally avoided for spinal anaesthesia for this reason.
How does the site of injection affect systemic absorption and toxicity risk?
The rate of systemic absorption, and so the peak plasma concentration and the
toxicity risk for a given dose, depends heavily on the vascularity of the injection
site.
A widely used ranking, from highest to lowest absorption, is:
intercostal and interpleural injection, then caudal and epidural,
then brachial plexus and other peripheral sites, then subcutaneous infiltration.
So the same dose produces a higher and more rapid peak,
and a greater toxicity risk, when injected into a vascular site such as the
intercostal space than into subcutaneous tissue.
This is why maximum safe doses are effectively lower at vascular sites,
why intercostal blocks carry a particular toxicity risk,
and why the dose and the use of adrenaline are considered in relation to the site.
So injection-site vascularity is a key determinant of systemic toxicity,
independent of the dose itself.
Discuss the adjuncts adrenaline, clonidine,
dexmedetomidine and dexamethasone in more detail.
Adrenaline, by vasoconstriction, slows systemic absorption, prolongs the block,
reduces the peak plasma concentration and toxicity,
and serves as a marker of intravascular injection through the tachycardia it
produces; it is traditionally avoided in end-arterial territories such as digits
and the penis, although the evidence that dilute adrenaline harms healthy digits is
now questioned.
The alpha-two agonists clonidine and dexmedetomidine prolong sensory and motor
block and improve analgesia when added to peripheral and neuraxial local
anaesthetic, through spinal and peripheral mechanisms,
at the cost of some sedation, bradycardia and hypotension.
Dexamethasone, given perineurally or intravenously,
prolongs the duration of peripheral nerve blocks,
probably through anti-inflammatory and other effects.
So adjuncts are chosen to prolong the block, improve analgesic quality and,
with adrenaline, increase safety, balanced against their own side-effects.
Give approximate onset and duration figures to compare the agents.
Approximate figures help in choosing an agent.
Lidocaine has a rapid onset, within minutes,
and an intermediate duration of one to two hours, extended by adrenaline.
Prilocaine is similar in onset with a slightly longer, low-toxicity profile.
Bupivacaine, levobupivacaine and ropivacaine have a slower onset,
of the order of fifteen to thirty minutes for a major block,
and a long duration of several hours,
suiting prolonged surgery and postoperative analgesia.
Chloroprocaine has a very rapid onset and short duration.
These are influenced by the site, dose, concentration and adjuncts.
So for a rapid, short block I would use lidocaine or chloroprocaine;
for a long block I would use a long-acting agent such as levobupivacaine or
ropivacaine, accepting the slower onset,
often combining a rapid- and a long-acting agent where both rapid onset and long
duration are wanted.
Tell me more about cocaine's toxicity and its management.
Cocaine is unique among local anaesthetics in blocking the reuptake of
noradrenaline and other monoamines,
which gives it sympathomimetic and vasoconstrictor properties — useful topically
for nasal and airway surgery but responsible for its toxicity.
Systemically it causes hypertension, tachycardia, arrhythmias,
hyperthermia and agitation, and importantly coronary vasoconstriction with a risk
of myocardial ischaemia and infarction, as well as cerebrovascular events.
In managing cocaine toxicity the cardiovascular effects are treated with
benzodiazepines to reduce the central sympathetic drive,
and with vasodilators such as glyceryl trinitrate or phentolamine for the coronary
and systemic vasoconstriction; the traditional teaching is to avoid unopposed
beta-blockade, which may worsen the vasoconstriction by leaving alpha effects
unopposed.
Its abuse potential and toxicity mean its clinical use is restricted and
controlled. So cocaine is the vasoconstricting,
sympathomimetic local anaesthetic whose toxicity is essentially that of excess
catecholamine action.
Give a final integrated answer on choosing and using local anaesthetics in regional
practice.
In regional practice I would select the agent for the block's requirements:
a rapid-onset agent such as lidocaine or chloroprocaine for short procedures and
rapid onset; a long-acting agent such as levobupivacaine or ropivacaine for
prolonged surgery and postoperative analgesia,
preferring these safer enantiomers to racemic bupivacaine;
prilocaine for intravenous regional anaesthesia; and adjuncts — adrenaline,
alpha-two agonists or dexamethasone — to prolong the block or improve its quality.
I would calculate the maximum dose in milligrams per kilogram for the patient,
allow for rapid absorption at vascular sites and for the parturient and the
acidotic fetus, and inject accurately under ultrasound with aspiration and
incremental dosing.
I would exploit differential block for motor-sparing analgesia and baricity for
spinal spread, avoid lidocaine for spinal anaesthesia because of neurotoxicity,
and remain prepared at all times for local anaesthetic systemic toxicity with lipid
emulsion to hand.
So the choice and safe conduct flow from the pharmacology,
the patient and the block.
Finally, summarise why bupivacaine is cardiotoxic and how that risk is reduced.
Bupivacaine is cardiotoxic because, beyond its anaesthetic sodium-channel block,
it binds avidly and dissociates slowly from cardiac sodium channels and impairs
cardiac mitochondrial energetics, so that high plasma concentrations cause profound
myocardial depression and refractory ventricular arrhythmias and cardiac arrest
that can be very hard to resuscitate,
sometimes with little preceding central nervous system warning.
The cardiotoxicity resides predominantly in the R-enantiomer of the racemic mixture.
The risk is reduced by using the pure S-enantiomer agents,
levobupivacaine and ropivacaine, which keep the anaesthetic efficacy with a wider
cardiac safety margin; by strict adherence to maximum doses and careful technique
to avoid intravascular injection; by avoiding bupivacaine in intravenous regional
anaesthesia; and by having lipid emulsion immediately available.
So enantiomer selection, dose discipline and preparedness for toxicity together
address bupivacaine's dangerous cardiotoxicity.
Thank you. That was a thorough and well-structured account. Let us stop there.
Before we close, here are the take-home messages.
First, Local anaesthetics reversibly block voltage-gated sodium channels from
within the axon in a use-dependent way;
the un-ionised form crosses the membrane and the ionised form binds,
so onset depends on pKa.
Second, pKa governs onset (closer to pH = faster),
lipid solubility governs potency, and protein binding governs duration;
esters are hydrolysed by plasma cholinesterase (PABA allergy),
amides are metabolised hepatically (allergy rare).
Third, Always calculate the maximum dose in mg/kg (lidocaine 3, with adrenaline ~7;
bupivacaine/levobupivacaine ~2; prilocaine ~6; ropivacaine ~3);
adrenaline slows absorption, reduces peak levels and prolongs the block.
Fourth, Local anaesthetic systemic toxicity progresses from CNS excitation
(tingling, tinnitus, seizures) to CNS depression and cardiovascular collapse;
bupivacaine is especially cardiotoxic. Treat with oxygen,
seizure/circulatory support and intravenous lipid emulsion.
Fifth, Levobupivacaine and ropivacaine (S-enantiomers) reduce bupivacaine's
cardiotoxicity; remember prilocaine/benzocaine methaemoglobinaemia (treat with
methylene blue) and that infected, acidic tissue blocks poorly.
Thank you. That concludes the station.